# logFeketeIdeal

Characterization of Logarithmic Fekete Critical Configurations of at Most Six Points in All Dimensions

Consider the problem of placing $n$ different points on the unit sphere $S^{d-1} \subset \mathbb{R}^d$, in such a way that the product of their mutual Euclidean distances is maximized:

$$ \max_{w=(w_1,\dots, w_n) \in (S^{d-1})^n } \prod_{i=1}^{n} \prod_{j=i+1}^{n} \| w_i - w_j \|^2 .$$

Taking logarithm in the objective function, we obtain an equivalent problem, known as the logarithmic Fekete problem:

$$ \min_{ w \in (S^{d-1})^n } - \sum_{i=1}^{n} \sum_{j=i+1}^{n} \log \left( \|w_i - w_j \|^2 \right) .$$

In this work we find and classify all the critical configurations of the logarithmic Fekete problem, for the case of at most six points, and for spheres of all possible dimensions. In particular, we find the previously unknown solution for six points on the sphere $S^3$, and also show thay for this case there exists a local minima that is not global.

Our strategy for determining all critical configurations proceeds as follows. First we define a system of polynomial equations, associated to the critical configurations. Then we count the number of complex solutions of the polynomial system, by computing a Grobner basis for its ideal. We call this quantity the "expected number of solutions". Simultaneously, we find as many solutions of the polynomial system as we can, and compare the number of found solutions with the upper bound. The proof of the Theorem is achieved because we are able to find enough solutions so as to exactly match the upper bound.

Grobner bases are calculated using *msolve* [^1], with graded reverse lexicographic monomial order (grevlex). We use version 0.73 of *msolve* binaries from the project website, with AVX512 instructions. Calculations are done with 20 threads of an Intel Xeon-Gold 6138 2GHz (provided by https://cluster.uy).

To calculate the dimension and degree of the ideal (number of critical configurations), we first calculate a Grobner basis of the ideal with msolve, and then pass this basis to *Macaulay2* (*M2*) [^2], using the command *forceGB* to let *M2* know that this is a Grobner basis. Within *M2*, we use the commands *dim* and *degree to verify that the number of solutions is finite and to obtain the number of solutions, respectively.
    
Both *msolve* and *M2* are open source software. *Msolve* implements the F4 algorithm [^3], with parallel algorithms for solving the linear systems generated by F4.

## References

[^1]: Jérémy Berthomieu, Christian Eder, and Mohab Safey El Din. 2021. msolve: A Library for Solving Polynomial Systems. In (46th International Symposium on Symbolic and Algebraic Computation). ACM, 51–58. doi: 10.1145/3452143.3465545
[^2]: Daniel R. Grayson and Michael E. Stillman. [n. d.] Macaulay2, a software system for research in algebraic geometry. http://www2.macaulay2.com.
[^3]: Jean-Charles Faugere. 1999. A new efficient algorithm for computing Grobner bases (F4). Journal of pure and applied algebra, 139, 1-3, 61–88.
